Aim: To understand the modes of operation in a Router and explore basic Router and Switch 
commands for configuring and managing network devices. 
Theoretical Description: 
A Router operates in various modes, each allowing different levels of configuration and command 
execution. The most common modes in a router are: 
1. User EXEC Mode: This is the initial mode when accessing the router, which has limited 
functionality, mainly for viewing basic information. 
o
 Prompt: Router> 
2. Privileged EXEC Mode: Provides access to all the show commands, debugging, and basic 
device management commands. You can also enter global configuration mode from here. 
o
 o
 Prompt: Router# 
Command to enter: enable 
3. Global Configuration Mode: Used to make system-wide configurations. You can configure 
interfaces, routing protocols, and other features. 
o
 o
 Prompt: Router(config)# 
Command to enter: configure terminal 
4. Interface Configuration Mode: Used to configure the individual interfaces (ports) of the router. 
o
 o
 Prompt: Router(config-if)# 
Command to enter: interface [type/number] (e.g., interface GigabitEthernet0/0) 
Switches also have a similar hierarchy of command modes and allow management through 
VLANs, port configurations, etc. 
Algorithm: 
1. Access the Router or Switch: 
a. Open a terminal or console session to the Router/Switch. 
2. Switch to Privileged EXEC Mode: 
21 
Computer Networks Lab (CSE3131) Lab Manual 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering 
a. Enter the enable command to switch from user mode to privileged EXEC mode. 
3. Enter Global Configuration Mode: 
a. Use the configure terminal command to enter global configuration mode. 
4. Configure Interfaces (For Routers): 
a. Use interface commands to configure IP addresses, enable/disable interfaces, etc. 
b. Example: interface GigabitEthernet0/0 
5. View Status and Information: 
a. Use commands like show ip interface brief, show running-config, etc., to view current
 configurations. 
6. Basic Switch Commands: 
a. Set the hostname, password, and manage VLANs. 
Output: 
1. Router Hostname Configuration: 
MyRouter(config)# hostname MyRouter 
MyRouter# 
2. Interface IP Configuration: 
MyRouter(config-if)# ip address 192.168.1.1 255.255.255.0 
MyRouter(config-if)# no shutdown 
3. Switch VLAN Configuration: 
MySwitch# show vlan brief 
VLAN Name 
Status Ports 
22 
Computer Networks Lab (CSE3131) Lab Manual 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering 
10  Sales 
active Fa0/1 
4. Interface Status on Router: 
MyRouter# show ip interface brief 
Interface 
IP-Address  OK? Method Status 
GigabitEthernet0/0  192.168.1.1  YES manual up  
Protocol 
up 
Conclusion: In this experiment, we explored the different modes of a router and basic switch 
commands. We configured a router's hostname, IP address, and interfaces, and also set up 
VLANs on a switch. 
Viva Questions: 
1. What is the difference between User EXEC Mode and Privileged EXEC Mode? 
2. Why do we use the no shutdown command after configuring an interface? 
3. What is the purpose of setting a default gateway on a router
